Hadoop_Hitters
==============

Baseball is statistics. Since what seems like the dawn of time, people have been breaking down any and every stat provided by baseball players. This results in the collection of a boat load of data. This data is also easily accessible for the average person thanks to web sites such as FanGraphs.com.  From there I was able to obtain every hitter’s batting statistics throughout the seven eras of baseball. The first phase, known as the “Beginning,” runs from 1871 to 1900. Then there was the “Dead Ball” era which stretched from 1901 to 1919. The “Live Ball” era followed that and was in effect from 1920 to 1941. “Integration” was the fourth era of baseball; it ran from 1942 to 1960. The fifth era is known as the “Expansion” era and went from 1961 to 1976. This is followed by the “Free Agency” era, 1977 to 1993. Finally there is the “Steroid” era and has been in effect since 1994. Considering baseball has defined so many eras of evolution, it led me to wonder, which era was the most advantageous for hitters? And which seemed to be geared more towards the pitcher?
To do this, I gathered the hitting statistics for every baseball player in each era. This provided a lot more data than was needed. To determine accurately which era had better hitters or pitchers, one only really needs to look at batting average, home runs, on base percentage, runs batted in, slugging percentage and strike out percentage. Everything else, such as stolen bases and wins above replacement, are not integral to comparing hitter/pitcher relationships. Also, hitters with less than 500 at-bats should not be included because their sample size is too small to really know what kind of hitter they were. If the player had less than 500 at-bats during an era it means that they probably played for less than one season and the average starter in one 172-game season will have an average of 688 at-bats. Therefore, players with less than 500 can be considered non-starters that typically wouldn’t play and shouldn’t be included in the study.

The mapper in the program will take all of the data for each hitter and determine which stats to collect. If the hitter in question has 500 at-bats or more, the mapper collects the hitters batting average, home run total, strike out percentage, walk percentage, runs, runs batted in, hits, plate appearances, games, isolated power, batting average on balls in play and slugging percentage and sends it to the reducer. The reducer will then take each statistic for all players in the era and compute the average of that stat as well as the maximum and minimum. From there the hadoop program will send the results to the output file.	

After going through the graphs and reviewing the numbers, it isn’t clear as to which era would be considered the era of the hitter. The “Live Ball” and “Steroid” eras definitely seemed to be more advantageous for hitters. This shouldn’t come as a surprise though, the “Steroid” era saw the highest average and maximum isolated power as well as home runs per year, on-base percentage and runs batted in per year. I found it interesting that the “Steroid” era didn’t have the highest slugging percentage, granted it had the highest average slugging percentage. It would see that the era with the player with the most home runs in history would also have the highest slugging percentage, but that isn’t what we find. Not surprising, is that it is the “Live Ball” era with the highest slugging percentage ever recorded. Also not surprising is who owns this slugging percentage, Babe Ruth has the highest slugging percentage ever recorded in a single season at .764 in 1923. If I had to choose an era as being the most advantageous to a hitter it would have to be the “Live Ball” era. I choose this era because it provided some of the greatest hitters of all time and the question of whether or not these athletes were “cheating” by using a performance-enhancing drug is not in question. The “Steroid” era comes in a close second though and the numbers show that these eras would be the worst for pitchers everywhere. If I were a pitcher, the “Dead Ball” era is where I would want to have played. Even though the average strike out percentage wasn’t the lowest, the “Dead Ball” era had the lowest average walk percentage as well as the lowest average slugging and on-base percentages and batting average. This means that hitters were not reaching base very often and were not scoring runs as frequently either.
